Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Vice President of
Development Technologies,
Ted Goldstein.
Good afternoon.
What an amazing day it's been so far.
I hope to keep this on a roll.
We have a lot to talk about.
I want to give you a quick
agenda of what we're going on.
Give you an update on what we've done
this last year with the Xcode Tool Suite,
and then talk about something
everybody cares about is performance,
and where we're going with what's next,
the future for Xcode,
and the compiler and runtime,
which is such an important part of
making applications great on Mac OS X.
Performance tools are a critical,
critical part of how you
make your application faster,
and we want to give you all the help,
not just making the compiler
produce great code for you,
but also give you the assistance it takes
to make your applications really perform.
And then finally,
how can you use Xcode with all the
great frameworks and SDKs you saw
this morning and this afternoon?
So let's jump right in and give you a
quick update on the Xcode Tool Suite.
So, in this last year,
we put out three releases of Xcode: 1.0,
1.1, 1.2.
And 1.0 was the feature release.
It had predictive compilation, zero link,
fix and continue, distributed builds,
smart groups, and code sense.
A very rich build.
In 1.1 and 1.2,
we elaborated and enhanced both the
performance capabilities of that,
the stability and the robustness of it,
and filled in a few of the missing
details and workflow issues.
Third-party tools quickly jumped in.
BBEdit and SubEtherEdit and Perforce,
almost immediately out of the gate,
was great third-party support
to show that Xcode was not
just an island by itself,
but included access for other tools.
In the 1.1 timeframe,
we added support for IBM's
terrific XLC and XLFC,
C++, and Fortran,
and Objective-C compilers.
And that is a great
benefit to the platform,
working with IBM.
They, of course,
also helped develop the 970 CPU,
the G5 processor that Apple ships.
And the combination is incredible.
Much of the great scientific
computing that's been done over
the years has been done in Fortran.
It's been, you know,
I can remember as an undergraduate
in school that we said,
I don't know what language people
will be using in the year 2000,
but it will be named Fortran.
Well, it's still true.
It's still named Fortran,
and it's a great language.
and there have been oodles of
templates and other components and
capabilities that add to Xcode.
This includes conduits and
AppleScript plugins and such
that really round out the
corners of making Xcode terrific.
And you've responded with over
300,000 downloads of these tools.
And that's,
I want to thank you very much.
I think that's an incredible
show of support for the platform.
Of course,
it's great to have a volume of users
using the tools and it's also extremely
important for us to be working with
our important developer partners.
Folks like Adobe are helping us to make
Xcode and GCC terrific for their tools.
Here's a quote from Fritz Haberman,
lead architect and head of InDesign.
And we think it's just an incredible
thing to be working with partners
because frankly a large code base such
as InDesign takes a lot of resources
to put it to a new environment and as
well for us to help the compiler really
encompass such an enormous code base.
And we learn and improve the product for
all of our developers with each step.
We also see this as well with Quark.
And Quark has been a fabulous partner
working with us to make Xcode great.
And we find that it's so important.
So important to be doing this process in
partnership with these key developers.
Of course, this morning we heard
from Maya Engineering,
from Bob Bennett,
and here very happy to say
that Maya 6 and Maya HT,
incredible, incredible applications
developed with Xcode.
And using the benefit,
the productivity benefit and the
performance gains that Xcode and
GCC provide to deliver on G5 performance.
So that is the key.
has been an amazing thing.
Now I want to invite--
Rich Siegel, CEO of Barebones Edit,
Barebones Software, sorry,
to talk a little bit about
building BBEdit with Xcode.
Thank you very much, Ted.
Good afternoon, everybody.
It's great to be here.
So when Apple announced Xcode a year ago,
almost today, in fact,
we were really intrigued.
At Barebones Software,
we've got a long history of, of course,
not only experience
using developer tools,
but also some of us have worked on them.
and we know that a diversity of
developer tools is a good thing to have.
It's good for the ecosystem,
it makes a better developer experience,
and that makes a better platform.
So when Xcode 1.0 shipped in October,
we took a good close look at it,
we kicked the tires,
and we thought about what's really
important to us when it comes to making
better products to serve our customers.
And it came down to really
three simple things.
The first was compiler quality.
And here, great job in Xcode.
GCC is an excellent compiler,
and I'll get into that shortly.
The next thing was build productivity.
Usually the first thing we do
when there's a platform change,
such as a new hardware platform
or a new tools platform,
is we'll sit down and we'll whip out
a stopwatch and we'll see how long
it takes to build our product line.
And finally,
the really important thing for us was
to be able to continue using as many
of our existing tools as we could.
So, on the first front, compiler quality.
Well, GCC is a great compiler.
Its language conformance is very good.
And what we found was when we
turned on all the warnings,
which Xcode makes really easy to do
because it's a great GUI for GCC,
is, you know,
we went through and we turned on
all the warnings and we found a few
latent bugs and we found some good
code quality improvements and so the
result is we have a cleaner code base,
it's more maintainable,
and we can run it through
even more compilers such as,
for example, XLC if we choose.
Also, the generated code is favorably
comparable to pretty much
everything else we've used.
We gave up nothing in code quality.
The next thing, as I mentioned,
was the productivity
improvement of build times.
And there, what we found was that
with distributed builds,
we were seeing about a 30% to 40%
decrease in build times compared
to building on a single machine.
So we have a little bit less time to get
a cup of coffee while we're building,
but in spite of that,
it turns into a real
productivity improvement.
The beautiful thing about that, however,
was that we were able to realize
this improvement without any
capital investment whatsoever.
We didn't have to go out and drop
$20,000 on a dedicated build farm.
Instead, we were able to use existing
hardware in the office,
administration workstations,
engineering workstations, operations,
marketing, even the machine that drives
our CD duplicator as part
of the in-house build farm.
So no capital expense,
a free 30% to 40% in build times.
It was like having our
cake and eating it,
too.
It just didn't get any better.
Finally, of course,
was the ability to use our own tools,
and here this was crucial.
And the external editor
support in Xcode was great.
I mean,
can you imagine us not using BBEdit?
So, we were really pleased
to be able to do that,
and in fact, on the converse,
not being able to do that would
have been a real deal-breaker.
So, I'm happy to say that as a result of
really meeting these three basic tests,
compiler quality, productivity through
building performance,
and being able to use our existing tools,
all of our product development,
with the exception of maintaining
current shipping versions,
but all of our products, BBEdit,
Text Wrangler, Mail Smith,
and SuperGetInfo,
are being built with Xcode today.
So, I just wanted to thank Ted and his
team for delivering a great tool chain.
Thank you, Rich.
It's so important.
And we focus on performance in
every part of the development cycle,
both on the build time, the launch time,
the runtime,
and development and debug time.
And each of these areas is critically,
critically important.
With Xcode 1.0,
we placed an immense amount of
emphasis on the batch build time,
that which you do in the office.
In this last year, though,
a lot of people said to us, Ted,
you know,
that's great when I'm in the office
and I can use distributed builds.
What about when I'm sitting in a cafe
drinking that cup of coffee on my laptop?
And there, of course, we,
so in this last year,
we have turned our attention really
from the main office build time
to really the cafe build time,
if you will.
And so I'm happy to say that
now Xcode build performance
is 33% faster on laptops.
We also get another 18% speed improvement
on dual processor machines as well.
And so we think of these
things as incredibly important,
and we will continue to make
improvements on each of the areas.
I think that it's critically
important to realize that GCC,
as the heart of this,
is already an amazingly fast compiler.
We are innovating in multiple ways.
One of the most important ways that
we're doing this is something we
think of as shortcut compilation.
And that is ignoring unnecessary
declarations and short-circuiting
unnecessary recompilations.
What's an unnecessary recompilation?
For example,
when you hit a space or put in a comment.
Really, the text and program meaning
of the code hasn't changed,
but just the white space, if you will,
of the program has changed.
And so this is coming out.
It didn't make your DVDs,
but will be in a future
download beta coming along soon.
Now let's turn our attention
over to launch performance.
The time it takes for
the program to start up.
Mac OS X has seen continuous evolution
of the Mac object file format.
Among the capabilities that we
typically advise people is to
pre-bind their applications.
Pre-binding is the set of setting
up the your application for a given
release so that the addresses of
the libraries are already located
in the executable text segment.
But the feedback on
pre-binding has not been good.
This is a great comment
from Arnold Sanity.org.
I really hate the fact that
Mac OS X requires pre-binding
for Mac OS X applications.
And there are whole websites.
Pre-binding is painful.
It's time consuming.
It's error prone.
And now I'd like to say that it's
unnecessary for most applications.
Starting in Jaguar,
but continue on in Panther,
and then resulting in some work that we
finally put it all together in 10.3.4,
we made it so that pre-bound Maya 6,
for example, one customer that we worked
with who was taking their
application from CFM to MockO,
originally in an un-pre-bound,
dynamically bound -- it's the
opposite of pre-bound -- state
takes about 48 seconds to launch.
And that kind of impends
on the development cycle.
In the pre-bound state,
it takes about 12 seconds.
And in 10.3.4 and Tiger,
it takes only five seconds
in the dynamically bound,
not pre-bound state.
Why could we do this so fast?
It's because we put in important
things like two-level namespaces and
hints to help to quickly find symbols,
so that it's not searching all of your
address space as the binding is going on,
but it's doing that very quickly
and searching a very small subset.
So this is an important technology,
and I think it's very helpful to have.
Tiger.
We've even made it one step further.
We're studying applications like Safari,
for example.
These are some preliminary
measurements where we have both the
pre-binding and the dynamically bound.
The pre-bound state is no difference.
We cannot tell the difference.
Now, you should always, you know,
this is a preview release.
We want to hear your feedback,
so please do some studies.
But we believe that pre-binding
is no longer necessary.
So that's pre-binding.
So what's next for Xcode?
With Xcode we have-- we're
releasing-- I think Peter had
already turned on the RSS feed,
so we already saw some of the press
releases hitting the Apple News site
that there is going to be an Xcode 2.0.
But in fact, there are two releases,
an Xcode 1.5 for Panther and
an Xcode 2.0 on Tiger.
And we've gotten this because you've
given us the feedback that says,
you know Ted, it's great for us to
get the next release,
but we don't wait that long,
and we want to use the new tools
and features that you have on
the current operating system
that we're shipping today.
So Xcode 1.5 contains most
of the goodies that 2.0 has.
Certainly everything that
can work in a 1.5 context,
it doesn't take advantage of
important frameworks and new
features that are Tiger only.
So we're going to try to do this.
I'm not going to make a firm commitment,
but definitely we've heard you,
that you want to have great
tools at the same time as you
have the forward-looking tools.
So let's focus in first.
And really,
1.5 is a feature release where we
focused on the features you've asked for.
Principal among that is an important
feature called dead code stripping,
essentially removing the
unnecessary code out of a program.
We also realized that even
though we're doing this amazing
formatting in code sense,
you also want to have
faster edit performance.
And edit performance is improved
in many cases by 10x and even
more for the very large files.
I think one,
saying that we love Java and AppleScript,
but where then was the code
sense support in Xcode?
And in 1.5 you've got it.
You've got support for code sense
and incremental compilation,
and Ant, and many other build system
features for Java and AppleScript.
You'll see some of that later today.
And finally, Subversion.
Gee, I thought I'd have to explain
to you what Subversion was.
So for the two people in
the room who don't know,
Subversion is a new version of CVS,
or a CVS-type system,
source code management system.
Many people believe it is
the logical successor to CVS.
It's done by the same
folks who did WebDAV,
so it has a terrific network orientation.
And so now Subversion support
is built in to Xcode 1.5.
We've also made a number
of debug improvements.
Now I want to bring up
Chris Friesen,
and Gaveler State from Transgaming.
Thanks, Ted.
So, at Transgaming we work on
software portability tools for the
entertainment software industry.
Specifically what that means is that we
work to provide tools and technologies
to allow developers and publishers
to take their games from one platform
to another very quickly and cheaply.
Now, we've been working on a
title called Tron 2.0,
which was recently released.
In fact,
you can actually go to CompUSA and
pick it up in the stores.
And one of the things we run into a
lot when we're dealing with porting
games is the fact that a game,
by its nature,
takes a huge amount of CPU,
huge amounts of RAM,
and most importantly,
wants to actually take over
your entire desktop and lock
your mouse into that window.
So trying to debug a game on
a single CPU can be extremely
difficult and cumbersome.
You have to kind of change your
rendering code to put it into
a window and share the RAM,
especially with huge symbols that you
get with some of these large projects.
So one of the things that we've
been working on is that we've
been working on a lot of things
that we've been working on.
And one of the things that we've been
working on is that we've been working
on is that we've been working on a lot
of things that we've been working on.
And one of the things that we've
been working on is that we've
been working on a lot of things
that we've been working on.
And one of the things that we've
been working on is that we've
been working on a lot of things
that we've been working on.
So one of the features
that Xcode 1.5 provides,
we've been playing with
for the last week or so,
is cross-machine debugging.
What we're going to show you
here is running the game,
Tron 2.0,
on one machine while debugging it
on a completely different machine.
Now, Chris Friesen has been intensively
training in the Tron 2.0 light cycle
game over the course of the lunch break.
And he's going to demonstrate
the results of that training.
Please, Chris, go ahead.
We have sound on the game machine?
Now, you know, I believe,
I was watching Chris train,
I believe this problem is not,
it's not that Chris didn't train enough.
The problem here is really
something very different.
Something that you wouldn't
necessarily expect on a light cycle.
But I think Chris is going to go here,
he's going to show you the
character he was set up to play.
And clearly the problem here is
that his character had spiky hair.
It was impeding the
airflow in the light cycle,
it just wasn't working.
So we're going to switch over to,
actually we're not going
to switch over quite yet.
What I'm going to do here is
I'm actually going to go on this
machine and activate a breakpoint.
All right.
You'll see that the game
machine has stopped.
And let's switch over to the
debugger machine for a moment.
And what we're going to see on the
debugger machine is the actual code
that's executing at this point,
which is in the middle of
Transgaming's proprietary
Direct3D rendering technology,
which allows us to take games written for
Win32 and bring them to other platforms.
And we've got a little extra piece of
code here that I added that can deal
with the whole spiky hair problem.
If a certain kind of
rendering is happening,
we're just going to mask it right out.
All right, so let me go back to the
breakpoints and disable that one.
And let's go back to the game machine.
[Transcript missing]
Remote debugging is also extremely
important when you're on two machines.
Was there one other thing?
I'm sorry?
There is one other thing.
It's going to take us a
second to get it ready.
We'll run that right
before your next demo.
Great.
So remote debugging,
numerous other features
in terms of globals,
support,
being able to set arbitrary expressions,
and a host of interesting features
you'll see as well in the 2.0 demo.
So let's go to Tron level 2-- I mean,
Xcode level 2.
So, a very big part of what people
care about is to be able to launch
quickly into their application
and quickly over to Xcode.
And you want to actually see
Xcode laid out in a way that's
similar and very good for you.
And so we've added a number of
important new layouts that are extremely
familiar for people from both the
Visual Studio and Code Warrior worlds.
We also saw earlier today Andreas Venker
give the modeling with the database.
That same modeling technology is
also available for object-oriented
programming for Java,
Objective-C, C, C++.
And we think that's going to
be a very big help to you,
even if you're not doing
database programming.
That's on the front end.
In the back end,
We've added support for
GCC 3.5 and 64-bit tools.
GCC 3.5 is the next generation of GCC,
and it has some amazing
performance features,
some of which are being innovated
by Apple and IBM working together.
And 64-bit support,
so that you can generate and take
advantage of the full address space.
I'm going to spend some
time talking about that,
too.
They're also important new performance
tools and some incredible SDKs that Xcode
is essentially the gateway to get to.
The traditional Xcode layout is all
very nice and compact and very neat.
And it has a number of great features.
But one of the things, of course,
is to have the debugger,
you have to open up a separate window.
And that kind of takes
your mind away from it.
Here we're looking at the console window.
Oftentimes to actually see it,
you're then doing your
own window management.
And one of the things that's very
popular on the Microsoft platform,
Visual Studio World,
is an all-in-one view where
everything is nice and compact.
And so we've added this now to Xcode.
You have a new all-in-one view
that essentially puts the debugger,
all of the tools embedded within
the tiling frame of Xcode.
But of course, it's important to have
an easy way to switch.
You'll see that there's a new toolbar
up on the top to be able to rapidly
switch function from one to the other.
The other important side of things
is this idea of a condensed view.
People familiar with
Code Warrior will have many,
many windows spawned off
of a central palette.
And that also is a new part
of what Xcode 2.0 supports.
So these two incredible features,
I think, help.
And why don't we take a look at
this and some other nifty features.
Let's bring Matt Firlik
and Chris Espinosa up to
give a demo of Xcode 2.0.
Thanks, Ted.
Xcode 1.5 and Xcode 2.0
are replete with features.
We only have a short time today,
so Chris and I are going
to demo two of them.
But we encourage you to go to the rest
of the sessions this week to check
out some of those additional features.
In addition to being a standard IDE,
Xcode provides a number of
facilities for dealing with
large problems that you have.
Let's stick on the whole concept
of debugging for a moment.
Global variables.
Kind of a necessary evil when working.
Everybody has them,
and even if you have more than
those just in your application,
there are potentially thousands
in all the shared libraries that
your application loads as being
an application on Mac OS X.
The question is,
how do you deal with those?
How do you figure out the values?
How do you keep track of those as
part of your development work cycle?
New in Xcode,
we're providing the ability to look at
global variables in your application
in a very simple and easy manner.
What you'll see right now is
that Chris has launched an
application called Celestia.
It's a freely downloadable application
for looking at 3D renderings of,
in this case, the universe.
What we've done is set up a breakpoint
under the history option here.
So we're going to go ahead and hit that,
and we're actually going to stop
right in the middle of the debugger.
Probably something you're
all very familiar with.
But say at this point we
wanted to actually go and
look at something interesting,
something in the sense
of global variables.
If you go and look up
under the debug menu,
you'll now see there's a tools menu,
and we have something called
the global variables browser.
Chris is going to go ahead and make this
window a little bit bigger so we can see
some of the more information in here.
You see on the left-hand side,
we have a list of all the
shared libraries that this
application knows about.
And when Chris selects one,
the right-hand side is populated with
information from that shared library.
We can see the name of
the global variable,
the file name, the value.
These are all standard views that we can
go ahead and reorganize the column view,
so we can take the file name out
of the way to look at something
a little more interesting.
But you can obviously
see an app kit here,
we have a lot of symbols,
in this case 500 that we're looking at.
Makes it kind of difficult
to find the ones you want,
so we've included standard features
like a search field at the top.
Chris could go ahead
and type in something,
for example, NSF,
and go ahead and filter all those
global variables down to the ones
that start with a common prefix.
Something relatively easy to do,
but it makes it very easy
to find something by name.
Not necessarily as interesting,
let's go and look at something
for the Celestra application.
Chris can go ahead and click on that,
and we're going to load the symbols
for the Celestra application.
Once it's done populating,
Chris is going to have to go
ahead and remove the search
field that he's typed in,
so he can get the values back.
Now that we see that,
let's go ahead and search on
something more interesting.
What if you don't actually know
the name of your global variable,
but you know, for example, it's an int?
We can go ahead and change the
search to look based on type,
as you see here, and Chris is going to go
ahead and type in int,
and now we can see,
you can actually go find the
global variables by type,
making it very easy to go
ahead and look at them.
So we made it very easy to
deal with the concept of large
amounts of global variables,
but how do you get this
into your workflow?
Well, you'll see that there's a nice
little column here called view,
and you can go ahead and check those.
Chris can go ahead and
select a couple of them.
Once we do that, if you close the global
variables browser and go back
to the standard debugger view,
you'll note in the variables display,
there's an element called globals,
but now when he expands it,
you'll see the global variables.
So we're giving the facility to take
something as large as global variables
and bring it down to a standard workflow.
On the same concept of this,
let's talk about designs.
Chris, you want to show them the
new design features of Xcode?
Sure.
Thanks, Matt.
Now, you got a taste of the design
features this morning in Bertrand
and Andreas' presentation when they
did the core data model for the
core data framework presentation.
This is a new feature of Xcode where
we are going to add design features
throughout the workflow from the
beginning of your application design all
the way through deployment and debugging.
The first two plugins for design
are here on your Xcode 2.0 CD.
You've already seen the
core data one this morning.
We're going to show you the
class plugin this afternoon.
Now,
what Matt's going to do is he's going
to take this Celestia application,
and he's going to create a new
class model of some of the classes
in the Celestia source code.
So he picks a class model,
gives it a name.
A class model is a project file
like any other project file.
It's stored in your project directory.
It's committed to your
subversion or CVS repository.
He's going to pick a set of sources,
a folder,
and he's going to make a tracking model.
He's going to add that to his group.
And now he has a model of
the sources in that folder.
Now, these are the classes.
Now, you've probably been familiar with
other applications that give you
a snapshot or a bird's eye view of
the classes in your application.
But it's pretty static.
It's how the IDE communicates
with you what the classes are.
What you can do with the design
tools in Xcode is you can use
the class model to communicate
to other people what they are.
So you can move these classes around.
You can expand them or collapse them to
show their methods and their functions.
And you can make the design look like
how you think the application works,
save it with your project,
and then when other people download or
check out your project and open it up,
they can explore it using the
class model that you've created.
Now, this is, of course,
wired to the project.
What Matt's going to do is he's going
to select a method in one class.
He's going to go straight
to the implementation.
That's fairly easy and obvious.
And he's going to go
back and using the menu,
he's going to go to the
definition in the header file.
and you can also,
because all of your classes may descend
from classes in the Apple frameworks
which have documentation behind them,
he can select a class and go
to its documentation in the
online documentation instantly.
You can go either to the object
itself or directly to the method
of the property on the object.
So these design features
are all built in.
Now, you've seen what we can do
with modeling your classes,
but you're probably wondering, hey,
why do I have to create a
separate file and store it in the
repository and in the project?
And you're probably
wondering about scalability.
How does it do one really well?
No, first what we're going to do
is show that it's tracking.
It's live.
It's connected to your project.
So as you change your project,
the model changes with you.
So what Matt's going to go do
now is he's going to add another
folder of sources to the model,
and there they go.
The design automatically updates.
[Transcript missing]
Thanks Matt and Chris.
By the way, of course,
great use for that is put it
up on the wall in the hallway,
your boss will think you're
really doing something.
You can find out more about that
Friday at 9:00 in the Modeling and
Design in Xcode session in North Beach.
So this is, I think,
one of the terrific new features.
I think it's one of the starring
great things in Xcode 2.0,
and a reason to use
both Xcode 2.0 and 1.5.
Now let's turn our attention to
the compiler and the runtime.
First,
let's give a little bit of a road map,
because we throw a lot
of version numbers out,
and if you're not on
the GCC mailing list,
you may lose track.
GCC 295 is really the oldest compiler
anybody is likely to be using,
and it generated code for G3 and G4,
but it didn't generate any of
those 64-bit G5 instructions.
295 is a compiler that we keep around,
because it supports original
10.1 text file format.
But other than that,
there really is no great
reason to be using 295 anymore.
The last compiler,
not the current compiler,
but the last compiler, is GCC 3.1,
and it too didn't generate code for G5.
The next compiler,
the current compiler that
everyone should be using,
is GCC3.3.
And it has great support
for optimization,
great support for the G5.
And so with this coming release,
we're going to obsolete some compiler.
Now,
I'd like to obsolete both 295 and 31,
but some people still want
to ship on 10.1 kecks.
So what we're going to do is we're
going to get rid of the 31 compiler,
and we're going to have the
GCC295 to be download only.
And we think that that's a
reasonable compromise for things.
So the current compiler, 3.3,
is the best -- is the compiler we
should be using for shipping products.
And this makes room for GCC3.5.
This is the leading edge compiler.
This compiler has terrific
new optimization features,
a brand new C++ parser.
It has also support for long doubles.
And 3.5 really is where most of
the attention is happening in
the Free Software Foundation,
the GCC community.
And if you look at it,
3.5 is really something you
want to start getting into.
Give us some feedback on it now.
We're putting it on the developer
tools distribution so that
you can begin working with it.
But of course, it's only in preview mode.
The big lifting in 3.5 is in
the performance improvements.
And we're totally retrofitting
the optimization technology.
Something called single
static assignment.
SSA form is really the
professional and best way to do
code generation optimization.
It's a little bit like register renaming,
for those of you who are
familiar with the hardware world.
And what it does is essentially
treats every expression that is
computable as a separate arithmetic
expression inside the compiler.
And the compiler can then do incredibly
good scheduling and overlapping and such.
That also gives you the ability
to have very fine-grained control.
And another terrific feature
called auto-vectorization.
We heard a lot this morning
about the GPU processing.
In fact, as well, the PowerPC, of course,
also has in it the AlteVec
Velocity Engine Processor.
And that allows us to have this
additional processing in parallel,
in addition to the GPU, but on chip,
this terrific capability.
Now, previously,
in order to take advantage of AlteVec,
you had to handwrite your own intrinsics.
You had to write, essentially,
very low-level instructions and do
the formatting for your instructions
so that all of your data types began
and ended on a 16-byte boundary.
But with autovectorization,
we essentially say, hey,
let's let the compiler do it.
The compiler can worry
about those details.
And so, instead of having to write the
autovectorizing code yourself,
the autovectorizer converts
the code and operates it.
And identifies your most common loops.
It works best with memory-aligned data.
So, if you can structure it so
that your blocks of memory
are on 16-byte-aligned chunks,
that's terrific.
But it doesn't have to be.
And there are annotations to tell GCC to
go and try to keep the beginning of a
data structure on a 16-byte alignment.
But that's not always possible.
The compiler will compensate and
put in the correct prologue and
epilogue code for those loops.
So, what's the problem?
What's the payoff?
Well, at the time I made these slides,
we were able to execute these
types of instructions in parallel.
When you have these kinds of arithmetic
expressions inside of a loop,
we can see anywhere
from a 4x improvement,
4x of a vector of values
being executed in parallel,
up to 12 and even 14x.
In fact, some late-breaking data,
some tests that I just read this morning,
have it up to 20x
performance improvement.
So, really amazing,
amazing improvement that you can get
from auto-vectorization for some codes.
And we think that you're going to
like using this feature because
it's really very simple to use.
You just enable it with one checkbox.
So, that's auto-vectorization.
Now, let's turn our attention to 64-bit.
64-bit is something that we had, in fact,
on Panther.
It's part of the G5,
access to greater than
4 gigabytes of RAM.
But we also gave this flag in GCC,
in Xcode, to compile for G5 architecture.
And this actually gives you, from C, C++,
Objective-C source code,
to 64-bit arithmetic operations.
So long-longs can already
fit in one register.
And we think that this is
already something that you
should be using on G5s,
even today on Panther.
But what do we actually
need with 64-bit memory?
Why do you want to break the 64,
the 4-gigabyte barrier?
And we think, in fact,
that a great many applications,
certainly those eight megapixel displays,
are going to give you lots of opportunity
to display all this great data,
all this supervision.
So,
all of a sudden now new vistas of media,
genomics, proteomics, medical,
engineering and one of my favorite,
geo-spatial applications,
now become possible.
Not to say that we didn't already
have techniques for sliding through
larger than four gigabytes of data,
but it was cumbersome and awkward.
So,
I'd like to have Steve Peters give you
a demo of a geo-spatial application.
Ken, we have this demo machine.
Ted, we're looking at TerraVision.
It's an open source app that
I downloaded from the net.
TerraVision is a visualization
app for terrain data,
and lets you see terrain data in 3D.
It's a 32-bit application that
takes advantage of a variety of
Mac OS X graphics frameworks.
Behind the scenes,
there's a 64-bit service application,
a service process.
I built that using the Tiger Preview
and the tool chain and Lib C,
readied for 64 bits.
Sure, let's give it a go.
So this is a computation, not a movie.
And as we move through this data set,
we'll encounter more and more
complicated terrain pieces,
going from topographical data,
Yosemite shimmering off to the east,
Landsat data around the Bay Area,
and finally this patch of high
altitude aircraft imagery data,
which gets us down to a
resolution of about a meter.
Anybody recognize that
feature in the Mid Bay?
That's Stanford Stadium.
and we'll swing around to
see... I think that's my house.
Yeah, University of Palo Alto,
you can see the Apple store down there.
I always wanted to visit Stanford,
so we'll roll up this way and see the
main academic quad and Palm Drive.
Little run up to the dish,
this is where the radio
astronomy towers are sited.
and then we'll sprint down,
actually sprint north, towards Slack.
In the foreground are
the experimental halls,
and then the linear accelerator running
off two kilometers into the background.
And there's this curious
feature about Slack.
It passes under Highway 280.
So I'd like to acknowledge
the creators of TeraVision,
Martin Reddy, Yvonne LeClercq,
and Lee Iverson.
They did this at SRI a few years ago.
And the take-home message here is,
with Tiger Preview,
you can start to experiment with
application architectures that
employ 64-bit service processes
like the ones we've shown you today.
Check it out,
see if your app would benefit
from some 64-bit goodness,
and enjoy the ride.
Thanks.
You bet, Ted.
64-bit addressing in
Tiger essentially gives you
access to much larger data sets.
How large?
Well, you can learn more about it,
by the way, on Wednesday at 10.30 a.m.
in Presidio with the Programming
for Mac OS X session on 64-bit.
We're doing a staged rollout.
So initially, we're focusing on the
lib system functionality,
the basic I.O.
capabilities that you need,
and the capabilities to map
it from a 32-bit address space
into a 64-bit address space.
and many more.
64-bit is an amazing number,
and if you're a geek like me,
you love big numbers.
How big is 2 to the 64?
Well, it's 16 exabytes.
It's that large number,
which I'm not going to read,
or 18 times 10 to the 18th.
And here,
your scientific training in exponential
numbers is going to come in very handy.
Really, it's -- having access to
these much larger data sets
really is going to change,
to some extent, the way you think about
data and data management.
And what you just saw in the application
that Steve demonstrated is essentially
we have a 32-bit GUI front end,
right?
But it talks to a 64-bit
service address space.
That service address space can
do a lot of the heavy lifting.
It can access a uniform
memory environment.
But the 32-bit address space
essentially is mapping in the data
structures that are needed to present.
Because, in fact, frankly,
there really is no great benefit
to doubling the size of a
pointer that points to a window.
There's only benefit to be derived
from a window that points into your
memory that has your actual data in it.
And so we believe that this is
a very convenient architecture.
It's one that's extremely scalable.
And it's one that gives you the benefits
of 64-bit without having to have to
take the big plunge to port your entire
application from 32-bit to 64-bit.
So this is what we mean by
kind of a scalable architecture
for 64-bit computing.
And as you can see,
we've already demonstrated that it
actually works and does actually
give great performance today.
I want to actually talk a
little bit about the future,
because I believe that
64-bit has some incredibly
interesting emergent properties.
When we made the transition
from 16-bit data to 32-bit data,
it's not that we all of a sudden had
the capabilities to do object-oriented
programming and computer graphics
in an incredibly intense way.
And that transition,
it's not to say that you couldn't
do object-oriented programming
in a 16-bit address space.
It just wasn't all that
useful or necessary.
Applications didn't have
to scale that large.
The functionality wasn't
all that impressive.
Going from a 16-bit
space to a 32-bit space,
all of a sudden now,
certain capabilities and technologies
became very easy and uniform.
And I believe the same
thing will happen now.
As we move from 32-bit
space into 64-bit space,
now we have amazing,
amazing capabilities to
access just a breadth of data.
And so I think of this
as kind of a supervision,
right?
We have this ability now to look at
scales of the universe and of data,
to make seamless transitions
between data sets so that,
in fact, you know, your locality search,
say, instead of Google being, you know,
a zip code, you just pinpoint where
you are on the globe,
zoom in, there you are, okay,
what's there?
It's so,
it's going to unlock incredible vistas.
And I'd love to see the
applications you folks are going
to develop with the 64-bit tools
we're providing to you today.
That's 64-bit.
Let's talk about the
next generation runtime.
Again, this is a little forward-looking.
We are working on garbage collection.
Why do you want garbage collection?
Well, it simplifies coding,
especially in a multi-threaded
world where events are
generated both by the network,
by the user, by perhaps other people,
and it can improve correctness of
your applications and improve the
memory efficiency of what you're doing.
So what we've been cooking up in
the lab is semi-automatic memory
management for Objective-C.
It's fast.
It has very low latency.
It's designed for
interactive applications,
and it's optional.
You don't have to use it.
On a per-application basis,
you can either enable
it or not enable it.
It's binary compatible with the
frameworks that we'll be shipping,
and we believe that applications
should begin experimenting with this.
It's kind of a rad feature
when it comes out in Tiger,
so we really don't understand yet
the complete balance yet between
high-performance applications and...
the amount of memory footprint it has.
So this is something where
we'll be making this technology
available in the Tiger timeframe,
and I think it's going
to be very interesting,
but this is not a journey
that lasts in one year,
right?
This is something that we will
explore together to figure out
different ways to tune this technology,
but I believe it's going to make a
very big improvement to productivity
and debugging of applications.
Instead of having to do sort of the
retained release style programming that
we do today in Objective-C and C++,
we will have techniques there that say,
you know what, memory,
when it's no longer being
referenced by anyone,
it can just be... the garbage
collector will reclaim it.
So this is cooking up in the labs,
and I'm very excited by this.
Thank you.
The other side of things
is performance tools.
So performance tools we provide help
you make your application great.
One of my favorite
performance tools is Shark.
What is Shark?
Shark is a multi-purpose tool.
We've enhanced it with functionality,
merging in capabilities
such as sampler into Shark,
and what it does is it
profiles everything,
all the way from the device driver
level to the kernel to the applications.
It has extremely low overhead,
and it works both in a
static and a dynamic way.
It annotates the source code
and the disassembly code,
and it gives you optimization tips.
So let's bring on Nathan Singleton
and Sanjay Patel to give
us a quick demo of Shark.
Thanks, Ted.
Good afternoon.
I'm really proud to announce
that we have a preview version of
Shark on your Tiger preview disks,
and we're also going to be
available shortly off the FTP site
with a new version of Shark.
And what I'd like to do is just
demo some of the features in Shark.
I think the best way to do that
is with an open source application
that we think was rather cool.
We found it out on the web.
It's called Celestia.
[Transcript missing]
So here's Celestia running.
And what you have to do if
you're going to optimize for
performance is add a little metric.
So we decided to figure out how long
it takes to run through this demo.
And now if we launch Shark--
You can see that we've added
lots of features to Shark,
but the main thing we had to do was make
sure that it was still very easy to use.
And the default workflow for most people
is simply to hit the Start button.
So right now we're actually
taking samples of the system.
So we're sampling not only Celestia,
all the running processes on the system,
by default, once per millisecond.
If we had stopped,
we're now going to process all
those samples that we took.
You can see by default we've
gotten what we call the heavy view,
and this is ordered from time
spent in the topmost function down.
Now you can also look and see that
we've sampled the entire system.
Celestia is taking up a little less than
half of the CPU cycles on this system.
You can see we have a thread pop-up to
show you all your threads of execution.
Celestia is single-threaded.
That explains why it's not
getting all of the CPU resources
on a dual-processor Mac.
Now we can also look at Celestia
in the more traditional tree view,
so you can see your code executing
all the way from main down.
New for Shark 4.0,
you can actually view heavy
and tree simultaneously.
So that was a big request.
We've added what we call
data mining features as well.
So we get a contextual menu,
as well as this side drawer,
which lets you filter out things
that you don't want to see.
For example, the system libraries.
You can also color your code,
so it's very easy to figure
out where you're spending time.
Now one area we've really
improved is the chart view.
So this is a chronological view
of your program's execution.
In this case, we have two processors,
so we have two charts.
Now we know that Celestia is
single-threaded at this point,
so let's just focus in on
its one thread of execution,
chronologically.
Now a big feature we added
was this Zoom slider.
So you can zoom in and out.
If you click on the stack,
so along the x-axis we have time,
and along the y-axis we have stack depth.
And you can click or
mouse around through here,
and you can see your stack at any
point during your program's execution.
So now if we go back to the profile view,
probably the coolest feature, I think,
of Shark is if you double
click on a function,
and we found this one function
in particular called Big Fix that
we're going to look at.
You see your source code.
But you don't just see your source code.
It's actually annotated,
and it's highlighted.
And what we did was we made
the brighter the yellow,
it's more important for your code.
That's the more important
time-consuming line of source.
And so you can see also Shark is
going to offer you advice when it can.
These are these exclamation points.
So for example,
we have this floating point
to integer conversion.
Now this is really bad for
a G5 because it causes a
serialization of the pipelines.
Now new for Shark is the fact
that we can look at both source
and assembly simultaneously.
So you can see exactly what the compiler
generated for each line of source.
And when you highlight
on a line of source,
it automatically highlights and
scrolls the lines of assembly
that correspond to each line.
Now, for me, I generally speak PowerPC as
well as I do English,
so we know that's not
true for most people.
So we have this PPC Help button
down in the corner.
and David S.
As you can see, it's actually updating
as we scroll through.
It updates and gives you a description
in English of what each mnemonic is.
So that's really cool.
And so it's really great to
be able to focus in on your
performance hotspots right away.
And we have this nice edit button now.
And this will jump you right into Xcode.
And the line that's highlighted in your
Shark Viewer is now highlighted in Xcode,
so you can edit away.
So if we go back to Celestia,
you can see that this demo has already
been running for over four minutes,
and this is the original
code when we got it.
We decided we should spend
some time optimizing it based
on what Shark had told us.
And you can see we did nine steps.
Now we don't have much time here.
So let's just show you
Warp3 for a second here.
If we restart the demo,
you can see that we're going to
do a flight through the universe.
We're going to stop around Saturn,
go off to one of its moons.
and pretty soon here we'll be done.
Now that's not bad.
Originally this demo took over
a thousand seconds to run.
So we made some
improvements at warp three.
But we weren't done.
We decided we should write AlteVec code,
we should do some G5 optimizations,
we should unroll some loops,
we should schedule code better.
And the sum of all that
is what we call warp nine.
And if we take a look at that,
you can see--
We got the demo to be a little
bit over 300 times faster from
where we started using Shark.
Thanks.
I wanted to put up the URL.
I think Celestia is a wonderful
application by itself,
though spend more than
five seconds looking at it.
There are lots more tools,
performance tools.
Shark is terrific and such.
But also, be able to look at, you know,
memory allocations, where is it going.
Very often,
an application that is slow is not
because it's algorithmically slow,
but because it's taking
up too much memory.
Features that also Shark has is to
be able to profile and set up the
events of when allocations happen.
There also are standalone
applications that you can leverage
and work with without the GUI.
Malik debug, object alloc.
Quartz debug for looking to
see your quartz allocations.
Sampler.
Spin control is a great
thing when you see the pizza,
the spinning cursor to understand
what it is the application is doing.
Great, great thing.
Thread viewer.
Accessibility inspectors and verifiers.
Very, very important.
A lot of -- both to make your
application accessible to the unsighted.
It's a terrific new -- it's a great
new set of capabilities in Mac OS X and
will give you the tools to help
make your application accessible.
So lots and lots of performance tools
and analysis tools on the developer CD.
It's worthwhile to explore it and there
are sessions on all these features.
Xcode is, in many ways,
the gateway to the
frameworks on the system.
And you heard this morning and
from Bertrand about a number
of the terrific SDKs and tools.
Spotlight is a great new SDK.
Dashboard, Core Data,
all of these SDKs have both,
in many cases, have additional tools.
For example, Quartz Composer to better
understand how the filters interact.
So it's a terrific thing to spend
some time and leverage this.
Core Data is a terrific SDK that unlocks
the virtues of persistence and database
for object-oriented programming.
I think one of my favorites, though,
is going to be the Automator.
And Automator SDK,
and let's bring on Tim Bumgarner
and Todd Fernandez to give us a
demo of the Automator Action SDK.
Thank you very much, Ted,
and good afternoon, developers.
I hope that you all got a chance to see
Automator this morning in the keynote.
While Sal did a great job of
showing off Automator's user side,
and Tim is taking advantage
of it right now-- I'm sorry,
it's already done-- running a
workflow to set up our demo,
we're here to show you
the developer side.
And the first thing we want
to do is show you an action
you did not see this morning,
an action that allows you
to create a new email.
And if you take a look at
the Actions user interface,
and Tim,
please bring up the people picker,
you'll see that something's missing.
There's no BCC support.
So in order to show you how easy
it is to create automator actions,
Tim and I are going to add
that support for you now.
and to do that there's three main steps.
We need to update our
actions user interface.
We need to add the connections
between the new user interface
elements and our code.
And finally,
we need to add our source code
in Apple Script and Objective-C.
So Tim,
please open the project in Xcode 2.0.
And the first thing to notice here
is that this is a native target.
Native targets now support AppleScript.
So let's go ahead and open
the nib in Interface Builder.
And there's our new text field
to hold the BCC addresses.
And we've added a BCC button
to the people picker.
and we've already wired that up
to a new addBCC items method.
Now what we have left to do is
to use Cocoa Bindings to bind the
value of that new text field for
the BCC addresses to a new variable.
Strangely enough, called BCC addresses.
And we've got that all set,
so please save the nib, Tim,
and let's get back to Xcode.
So now that we have Cocoa Binding
setting this new variable,
BCC addresses,
we need to actually use it in our script,
which is used to manage
the actions user interface.
Tim, go ahead and add a line of
code to read the BCC addresses
out of the parameters block,
which is managed for
us by Cocoa Bindings.
and here we're showing off another great
new feature in Xcode 2.0 that we now
have code completion for Apple Script.
Excellent, let's save that.
And Tim,
if you could just give us a brief tour.
We already have the rest of the
AppleScript code analogous to what we
already had for the two ANSI C addresses.
and Dan Lebowitz.
And down at the bottom,
we're taking advantage of Mail's
great scriptability to add the new
BCC recipients to the new email message
that the action will create for us.
All right,
that's all we needed to do in our script,
so let's please save that, Tim.
And finally,
what we need to do is open up an
Objective-C class and take a look
at that new addBCCItems method.
And really all we needed to do was
copy and paste and change three CCs to
BCCs to read the value from the people
picker and add it to the text field.
So great, that's all we needed to do,
is add this new feature.
So Tim, if you would hit build and go,
please.
And we'll save our script.
And what we're doing here
is taking advantage of a
custom Automator executable,
which is a great Xcode feature,
which has a launch argument which passes
the newly built action to Automator
when we launch it directly from Xcode.
This gives us a very efficient
development cycle and very much
like building a normal application.
So let's add our new email
action to the workflow.
And we see it's got a BCC field.
and the People Picker has the
button that allows us to add
new addresses to that field.
So Tim, if you'd BCC me please.
And let's send a message to Ted,
since he's been so gracious
as to let us share his stage.
And CC Tony.
And let's tell them what
a great combination that
Automator and Xcode 2.0 are.
It's kind of a boring email,
so let's make it a little
bit more interesting.
Let's add an image to it.
Strangely enough,
an image of another great combination.
And let's go ahead and run the workflow.
And there's our email with the
VCC field correctly filled out,
and we've got the Venus transit
a couple weeks back.
So in a few short minutes,
we've shown you how easy it is to
use your development language of
choice to create automator actions.
And I hope that you'll all join me
tomorrow morning at 10:30 in the
Mission for a full session explaining
just how easy it is to create a rich
set of actions for your applications.
Thanks very much, Ted.
Thanks, Todd.
Thanks, Tim.
So, yes, tomorrow morning, 10:30.
I think Automator and connecting
up applications is going to
be a very incredible thing.
We're asking all the application
developers to really think about
and expose-- it's very simple to
expose an AppleScript interface
and add these actions.
You can actually add
Automator actions in,
really, the language of your choice.
It's very simple to do
it with AppleScript,
but it doesn't require AppleScript.
There's many different ways to do this.
It's really a very simple set
of nibs that can be copied,
dragged, and pasted into your project.
And to really enable this
is a terrific way to do it.
This technology grows out of work
done to also enable Unix shell
scripting and many kinds of things.
So this is a foundational piece of
technology that I think you're going to
see a lot of exciting things happening.
And it's a terrific way for many
applications to become very integrated
and to leverage the capabilities
from one application to another.
for our customers' benefits.
So to summarize,
Xcode continues to advance
for Panther and Tiger.
We think that Xcode is helping people to
build faster applications in less time.
So improving both the
performance of the applications,
both with compiled code
and generated code,
and by taking advantage of
new performance capabilities.
We think it's going to be
extremely important to Automator
enable your application.
And we think that Xcode is
really the new foundation for a
large number of terrific things.
Now, I know many of you have seen
that a few of us around here
sporting these great shirts.
I want to invite Rich Siegel and
Gabrielle State back up here.
I want to hand them some shirts
for being some of the first
applications we're showing,
developed in Xcode.
Hand them a shirt.
Thank you.
Thanks so much, Ted.
And you have a little other demo to show?
Yeah.
So while Ted was getting everything ready
and showing off that Automator demo,
I thought, gee, you know,
I really hope that Apple concentrates
on security for that stuff,
because it can be really important.
You know, in the Tron game,
if we get the sound there,
that'd be great.
Get the sound on?
Tron game,
there's a little problem with that, so.
Please,
I've got to get back to my routing.
[Transcript missing]
Yeah, so that's the danger
of some of this stuff,
so I'm sure you guys will
do a great job on that.
Little email scripts can run amok, huh?
Exactly.
Thanks a lot, Gabriel.
So we have a few more shirts here,
but in fact, when you come down to the
Apple campus on Thursday,
we're going to have a lot more.
And if you bring your application
running on a laptop and show us
your application building in Xcode,
then we'll have a shirt for you as well.
So we're going to throw out a few now.
and David S.
So only a few today.
You've got to show us your
application building in Xcode.
So thank you very much and
have a great conference.